# Spring Boot Persistence Cheat Sheet

This cheat sheet is broadly applicable, but assumes that you're using H2, Spring Boot, and Gradle.

## POM Dependencies

Add the following to the `dependencies section of your `build.gradle` (listed here as GroupID / ArtifactID):
    - `compile('org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa')` (includes Hibernate as a dependency)
    - `compile('com.h2database:h2')`

## Java Persistence API (JPA)

### Class Annotations

`@Entity` - Required for Hibernate to store/retrieve instances of the class to/from the database.

`@Table` - *Optional*. Specifies the name of the table in the given database used to store the objects properties. If omitted, the table name is generated via the configured naming convention.

### Setting up your class

Each persistent class -- that is, each class that you want to be managed by Hibernate and stored in the database -- needs to follow a couple of important rules. These rules will allow Hibernate to properly create objects when pulling data from the database. If you don't follow these rules, you'll see Hibernate-related exceptions upon starting your application.

### No-arg constructor

**Every Hibernate-managed class needs a public constructor that takes no arguments** (aka a "no-arg constructor"). For example, if we're dealing with a class named `User` then it should have a constructor that looks like:
```java
public User() {}
```
This allows Hibernate to create a new instance of your object, no matter what properties it may have. Instance properties won't be initialized by this constructor, obviously, which is why we need the next rule.

### Field Annotations

These are annotations are applicable within a class annotated by `@Entity`. They determine how object fields are persisted in a database.

These annotations can, in most cases, be applied to object fields directly, or to their getter methods. We recommend applying them to fields, which means you don't have to expose a public setter for the given property, which can break encapsulation (think of an `id` field with a public setter). [Read about][field-vs-property] how these two approaches are different, and why you might choose one over the other.

`@NotNull` - This is not actually a JPA annotation -- it is part of the `javax.validation.constraints` package -- but Hibernate enforces it as well. Specifies that the field may not be null.

`@Column` - Specifies the name of the column in the given table used to store the field. If omitted, the column name is generated via the configured or default naming convention. There are several attributes -- such as `nullable` and `unique` -- that result in database-level restrictions being applied (i.e. in database constraints rather than Hibernate constraints).

*Note*: `@NotNull` and `nullable = false` have similar but slightly different effects. [Read more](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7439504/confusion-notnull-vs-columnnullable-false) about how they differ.

`@Id` - The field should be considered an identifier for the class. In particular, the corresponding column in the database should be a primary key. A field with this annotation must one of: a primitive type, a primitive wrapper type (e.g. `Integer` or `Float`), `String`, `java.util.Date`, or a few others (see documentation link below).

`@GeneratedValue` - Specifies that the field should be generated by Hibernate. This annotation can be configured to use different value generation strategies.

`@OneToMany` - Specifies a field that is a collection of other persistent objects.

`@ManyToOne` - The inverse (or "other side") of the `@OneToMany` annotation. This is used within a class that is "owned" by another class, to annotate a field that points back to the "owner". For example, with `User` and `Post` classes (where `Post` represents a blog post, of which a `User` can have many), the `Post` class can have an `author` field that points to the object that owns it.s

`@JoinColumn` - Typically used in conjunction with `@OneToMany`, this annotation specifies the column on the "owned" object's table that should be used to identify it's owner. In the blog example, the value of the `author_uid` column specifies the `uid` of the `User` that owns the `Post`.

`@Transient` - Specifies that Hibernate *should not* store the field in the database.

## Using MySQL

Using a local MySQL database will allow your data to persist between application shutdown and startup. H2 databases exists only while the given application is running.

An easy way to install MySQL on Mac and Windows is via [MAMP](https://www.mamp.info/en/).

### Dependencies

To use a local MySQL database, add the following dependencies in `build.gradle`:

```nohighlight
compile('org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-jdbc')
compile('org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa')
compile('mysql:mysql-connector-java')
```

If you previously used H2, remove that dependency.

## `application.properties`

The database connection needs to be configured via `src/main/resources/application.properties`.

These properties use `property=value` syntax. For many, there are alternative values listed in the Spring documentation, but these are good for most purposes. The database user specified usually needs all privileges on the given database.

`spring.datasource.url` - of the form `jdbc:mysql://localhost:8889/db` for a local database `db` on the default MySQL port 8889

`spring.datasource.username` - Username to use when connecting to the db

`spring.datasource.password` - Password to use when connecting to the db

`spring.jpa.database = MYSQL` - specifies that you'll be using a MySQL database

`spring.jpa.hibernate.ddl-auto = update` - Spring should attempt to update the database schema upon restart to reflect any changes to persistent model classes

`spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.dialect = org.hibernate.dialect.MySQL5Dialect` - Specifies that we're using MySQL 5.x

The database engine must be running when you start up your application.

## Additional References

- [Spring Data JPA Reference](http://docs.spring.io/spring-data/jpa/docs/current/reference/html/)
- [Object Relational Mapping (ORM) in Spring](http://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/html/orm.html)
- [JPA Annotation Reference](http://www.objectdb.com/api/java/jpa/annotations)

[field-vs-property]: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/594597/hibernate-annotations-which-is-better-field-or-property-access
